1
Do California Insurers
Reward Wildfire Resilience
Carolyn Kousky and Xuesong You
In 2022, California implemented regulations requiring homeowners insurers to adopt
premium discounts for policyholders who take steps to lower the risk of a wildfire burning
their home. In this essay, we examine how California insurers have responded to these
new regulations and summarize the premium reductions currently available in the
California market. If homeowners adopt both the maximum home hardening upgrades and
defensible space, the greatest premium discount they will receive varies from only a few
percent to over 40 percent depending on the insurer and the loss reduction standards
adopted.
Making Homes Safer from Wildfire
Wildfire risk in California has been growing as a result of a confluence of factors. Climate
change is increasing the frequency of hot and dry conditions that exacerbate wildfire
behavior. A warming planet has also brought drought and pest infestations to California’s
forests, causing millions of trees to die, which then become easy fuel for a fire. The number
of structures in areas prone to wildfire has grown and many of those have not been built to
high levels of wildfire resistance. A history of fire suppression has led to fuel buildup in some
of the state’s forests, causing more catastrophic fires than there would be otherwise. All of
these are driving up wildfire risk in the state.
As several fires have demonstrated, including the recent blazes in Los Angeles, it is not just
wildland fires that are a risk to California, but also urban conflagrations, which can occur
when those wildfires spread into developed areas. In urban fires, buildings become the fuel
that allows fire to spread from structure-to-structure. While the dangerous combination of
high winds and very dry conditions enables these urban fires, how we build can make a
difference. This includes making homes more wildfire-resistant, reducing flammable
materials near the home, and ensuring adequate separation between structures. Creating
fuel breaks in the community and improving the management of surrounding natural lands
can also lower fire risk.
Wildfire and building science has identified measures that help make homes more fireresistant. This includes protecting the home against embers, radiant heat, and flames
through upgrades such as installing flame- or ember-resistant vents, cleaning gutters,
installing a Class A roof, using multi-pane windows, and ensuring noncombustible
clearance on exterior walls, among others. Many of these improvements are captured in
California’s Chapter 7a building code, one of the strongest fire codes in the country
(becoming California Wildland-Urban Interface Code (CAWUIC) Part 7 in 2026). Adopted in
2008, the code applies only to new construction in certain designated areas. So, while
critical, many existing structures across the state still need retrofitting. There are also some
Nov 4
2
areas at greater risk of urban fires, including part of the Eaton fire footprint, where the code
should arguably apply but does not.
Beyond the structure itself, the so-called “zone zero” of zero to five feet from the home
should also be clear of combustible materials. This includes removing brush, mulch, or
firewood piles, for example, and also ensuring fencing next to the house is noncombustible.
Research examining surviving homes after past wildfires verifies the huge value of these
changes: not only does it help make homes less likely to burn, but it also provides
protection to neighboring homes.
Community layout also matters. Homes can ignite their neighbors through embers, flame,
or radiant heat. A minimum of 30 feet between structures is recommended to limit spread
from one home to another. In addition, creating buffers around clusters of hardened homes
and ensuring easy road access for firefighters can possibly slow spread or increase the
effectiveness of firefighting defense forces.
The greatest fire reduction is achieved when all these measures are done together. Recent
studies examining past fire losses indicate that combining home hardening with the
creation of defensible space has the potential to dramatically reduce losses. The Insurance
Institute of Business and Home Safety (IBHS) has designed the integrated Wildfire
Prepared Home (WPH) Base and WPH Plus standard, which unite all these measures for
maximum protection. WPH covers core features such as the roof and vents, as well as
enclosing lower-level decks where embers might land, establishing the 0-5 foot noncombustible zone, and defensible space in the yard. WPH+ adds additional requirements
that focus on areas where home ignition or spread is most likely to occur, such as
upgrading windows and doors to withstand heat-induced shattering, switching to noncombustible materials for decks, and moving adjacent structures and connected fencing
away from the main building. Additionally, IBHS has announced a Wildfire Prepared
Neighborhood standard that also integrates community-level measures. The IBHS
standards are the most stringent and comprehensive, although it may be more difficult and
expensive to achieve in already built homes and communities.
Insurance Incentives for Loss Reduction
Insurance prices should reflect risk. When measures are adopted that lower wildfire risk,
then, this should be reflected in insurance market outcomes in terms of lower prices or
greater availability of coverage. There have been consumer concerns, however, that even
when investments in safety are made, they have not been showing up in the insurance
market. Why does this matter?
Mitigation discounts build consumer trust in the insurance market. It demonstrates
that insurance pricing takes into account the actual risk at a property, as well as any
benefits associated with mitigation investments made on the property, and that insurers
will share those benefits with their policyholders. This increases perceptions of fairness.
Discounts for loss reduction also correct market failures. When a homeowner invests
in risk mitigation that effectively reduces potential losses, they lower not only their own risk
of experiencing a catastrophic fire but also the insurer's overall exposure. Without
mitigation discounts, homeowners bear the full cost of these investments while the
insurers reap much of the financial benefit of reduced losses. Beyond this being perceived
3
as unfair by consumers, it also is a form of market failure, where homeowners have less
incentive to invest in mitigation because the full benefit is not reflected in their premiums.
Insurance discounts for mitigation allow homeowners to capture some of the economic
value, thereby aligning financial incentives – homeowners are rewarded with lower
premiums for their individual investments in risk reduction.
Transparent mitigation discounts help convey information about clear actions
customers can take. Beyond aligning incentives, mitigation discounts also generate
valuable information by simplifying complex engineering guidance into clear price signals
that households can easily understand. When insurers set discounts appropriately to
reflect the value of each mitigation measure, households can quickly learn about the
effectiveness of these investments with reduced information costs. But this value only
materializes if the discounts are accompanied by clear and transparent communication.
Individual mitigation generates collective benefits. Finally, there are two types of
spillover effects as homeowners engage in mitigation. When one property owner reduces
risk it lowers risk for the neighbors, as well. Also, when neighbors take actions to reduce
risk, others often follow suit. The increased demand for fire-resistant building materials,
defensible space services, or/and certified inspectors can then help lower costs over time
through economies of scale and create positive feedback loops encouraging even greater
loss reduction and further improved insurance market outcomes.
California’s Recent Regulations
Since wildfire mitigation discounts were not being widely offered voluntarily by insurers, the
California Department of Insurance adopted a new regulation in the fall of 2022 referred to
as Safer from Wildfire. The regulation requires property insurers in California that offer any
price variation based on wildfire risk to also adjust their rates to account for investments in
improving the wildfire resilience of homes (CA Code of Regulation Section 2644.9). The
California Department of Insurance created a list of a dozen wildfire risk reduction
measures that insurers had to consider in new rate filings by spring 2023.
This list, as detailed in Table 1, includes two community-level designations, five defensible
space-related measures, and five home hardening-related measures. The two community
measures are Firewise USA, a voluntary program that provides a framework for
communities to reduce risk, and the state’s list of Fire Risk Reduction Communities, which
have met best practices for wildfire planning. Of note, since the IBHS Wildfire Prepared
Home program launched that same year, it is not on the required list from the Department
of Insurance, although some insurers are offering discounts for it voluntarily.
The regulation did not, though, mandate what the discounts for each mitigation measure
had to be – only that insurers must offer something. That said, insurers have to provide
justification for the discounts in their rate filing. As loss data and evidence on various
measures continues to be collected, the discounts should likewise evolve. In addition, while
insurers are required to take these twelve specific measures into account, they are not
prohibited from considering others such as fuel management or firefighter access. Insurers
have the option to incorporate these additional factors by either integrating them into the
wildfire risk score used for rate-setting or by providing separate credits for them.
Table 1: Wildfire Mitigation Measures California Insurers Must Consider for Rate Setting
5
In addition, insurance companies were required to notify policyholders about the new
regulation. The communication to the policyholder had to include details on the risk
classifications and discounts, explain how the current policyholder was being evaluated,
and outline what mitigation measures the policyholder could adopt to obtain greater
savings.
Wildfire Mitigation Discounts in the Market
To gain a better understanding of the wildfire mitigation discounts available in the market,
we reviewed the current rate filings as of October, 2025 for the top 15 California
insurance companies, which together account for 83% of the market share according to
direct premiums written for homeowners business in 2024. Note that insurers could have
rate filings under review and will submit new ones over time – this is thus a current
snapshot of the market. The appendix table at the end of the post shows all the
discounts for each of the mandated 12 mitigation measures by these insurance companies
(listed in order of market share), as well as the discounts offered for optional measures
such as IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home. In addition, some insurers offer a “completion
discount,” which is an extra premium reduction for homeowners that have undertaken
some or all the mandated measures. Table 2 summarizes this information and shows the
range of discounts offered for various mitigation measures across these insurers. (Note
that the CA FAIR plan also provides discounts but they are not included in our analysis.)
Table 2: The Range of Wildfire Mitigation Discounts Offered by the Top 15 Insurers
7
Before we dive into the main findings, there are three important notes about the numbers.
First, this table reflects pricing, not underwriting – it says nothing about whether
these insurers are offering more or fewer policies in high-wildfire risk areas. (The
California Department of Insurance has another approach – the Sustainable Insurance
Strategy – to increase greater writing of policies in wildfire-prone areas.)
Second, note that the percentage numbers apply to different base premiums, the
fundamental starting price of a policy. Different insurers will charge different premiums for
the same property, so the percentage shown will not translate to the same dollar discount.
Also, note that some insurers apply their discounts only to the wildfire portion of the
premium, while others apply them to the entire premium. A percentage applied to just
the wildfire portion will have a lower impact in absolute dollars for the policyholder than one
applied to the entire premium. This is noted in the table: State Farm and CSAA are the two
insurers that apply percentages to the entire premium and the others apply just to the
wildfire portion of the premium.
Finally, in most cases, the mitigation measures do not affect the “Wildfire Risk Score” used
by some California insurers to determine rates; instead, they are applied as a discount
factor. However, in some instances, these measures can directly change the “Wildfire Risk
Score,” resulting in a change in the premium through both the score and the discount
factor.
What did we find?
Discounts vary greatly across insurers. The same mitigation measure can be treated
quite differently by different insurers. For example, the discount given for living in a Firewise
Community ranges from less than 1% to 20% (both applied to the wildfire portion of the
premium). Having a Class A roof can yield discounts from less than 1% to 5%. Some
insurers offer no discounts for IBHS WPH(+) properties, and among those that do,
properties that meet the IBHS WPH+ standard can receive discounts ranging from less
than 4% to 39%. This variation is somewhat surprising and suggests insurer confidence in
the evidence base around the effectiveness of different measures may vary considerably,
as well as their assessment of consumer demand to maintain a policy with an insurer that
rewards wildfire mitigation. Given the variation in discounts, consumers who have invested
in wildfire risk reduction should shop insurers, especially those with an IBHS WPH or WPH+
home since not all carriers are offering sizable premium savings for that level of certified
investment in loss reduction.
Mitigation measures are not equal. Wildfire and building science indicate that all
mitigation measures are not equal in terms of loss reduction and this is clearly reflected in
insurer discounts: some measures are given larger premium reductions than others. In
particular, having a Class A roof stands out as widely recognized as an important upgrade,
with six insurers offering the highest discounts for this as compared to other property-level
measures. Since most homeowners in California already have a Class A roof, this discount
should be widespread. Still, a number of insurers simply offer the same discount for each
individual measure, regardless of their varying potential impacts on losses. This is likely due
to a lack of data from historical experience to accurately evaluate and model the loss
impact associated with one-off adoption of individual mitigation features. Indeed, a few
8
insurers have noted in their filings that they do not have sufficient and credible wildfirespecific claims data, along with the necessary details on required mitigation measures, to
inform the discounts they establish.
A comprehensive approach to mitigation matters. Many wildfire experts note that it is
important to do all the wildfire risk reduction measures as a complete package. When
individual mitigation measures are taken in isolation, their effectiveness in reducing losses
can be limited. However, when some or all of these measures are combined, their effects
can be much larger. This understanding is also reflected in the discounts. Many insurers
offer only small price reductions – often around half a percent for each individual measure
alone. When done together, however, the premium reductions combine and four insurers –
Farmers, Allstate, Travelers, and Sutton National – also offer an additional “completion
discount.” Mercury refers to their version of completion discounts as “Mercury Wildfire
Mitigation (plus)” discounts. While Auto Club Southern California does not offer a
standalone “completion discount,” it provides a tiered structure that rewards substantial
completion: Policyholders who complete up to six property-level measures will receive a 1%
increase in their discount for each additional measure completed; for those who complete
seven or more total measures, the discount increase accelerates to 2-3% for each
measure completed beyond the sixth.
To further incentivize a comprehensive approach to mitigation efforts, seven insurers –
State Farm, Mercury, CSAA, Travelers, Safeco, Nationwide, and Liberty Mutual – also offer
discounts for IBHS certification, with some providing sizable savings. The IBHS WPH and
WHP+ standards are complete packages of many measures together. Specifically, IBHS
WPH includes property-level measures shown in Table 1 of 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, and 12 and IBHS
WPH+ includes all those, as well as 6, 9, and 11. When policyholders qualify for both
individual and IBHS discounts, four of the seven insurers that reward IBHS certification –
State Farm, Mercury, CSAA, and Travelers – provide premium savings in the form of an
IBHS-specific “completion discount,” i.e., an additional discount on top of the individual
discounts for measures taken alone. The remaining three insurers only provide the IBHS
discount as the maximum available discount, although this IBHS discount is typically
greater than the sum of these individual discounts alone.
Note that the IBHS discounts from Mercury depend upon home spacing, which has been
shown to influence how likely a home is to catch fire from its neighbors. The maximum IBHS
discounts for WPH (28%) and WPH+ (39%) are for homes at least 30 feet from each other.
At less than 10 feet separation, those discounts drop to 5% for WPH and 10% for WPH+.
The Mercury version of completion discounts (for homes that do not have IBHS
designations), what they refer to as “Mercury Wildfire Mitigation (plus)” also varies by
home separation. These discounts are just slightly less than those given for IBHS
certifications.
The way firms combine discounts, however, varies, making the total potential discounts for
completing multiple mitigation efforts less straightforward. Some insurers, such as Mercury,
USAA, Travelers, and Federal Insurance, multiply discounts (rather than adding them). For
example, if a Federal Insurance customer installed a Class-A roof (5% discount) and multipane windows (5% discount), Federal Insurance calculates the total discount as 1 -
(1-5%)*(1-5%)=9.75% (instead of 5% + 5% = 10%). The difference grows larger when you
do the multiplications for all 12 measures. When a home is located in a community
9
recognized as both a Firewise USA site in good standing and a Fire Risk Reduction
Community, some insurers, such as Auto Club Southern California, Sutton National, and
Pacific Specialty, impose a maximum cap that is lower than the combined community
discounts.
To facilitate comparison, we calculate the total possible discounts that policyholders
should expect from the top 15 insurance companies. Table 3 lists these firms, whether or
not they offer an IBHS discount, and outlines the premium discount policyholders should
expect for two combinations of mitigation measures: (1) completing all 12 mandated
property-level and community-level measures/designations from Table 1 (shown in column
5 of Table 3), and (2) completing all 10 property-level measures, as well as IBHS WPH+
certification (for those insurers not offering IBHS discounts, it is just the discount for
completing all the property-level measures) (shown in column 6 of Table 3). Again, we
observe wide variation among insurers. In Column 5 of Table 3, the total potential discounts
for completing all 12 mitigation measures (without obtaining IBHS certifications) range from
3% to 28%. In Column 6, having a home that completes all 10 property-level measures and
is IBHS WHP+ certified can yield potential discounts of 2.6% to 42% across different
insurers.
10
Verification processes differ. While not shown in the table, the methods used by
insurers to verify mitigation efforts also vary, as noted in their filings. For the property-level
mitigation measures, some insurers require certified inspections conducted by approved
inspectors or from an independent, third-party organization like IBHS, while others only
require self-attestation or customer-provided photos or documentation. It is generally easier
and less costly on the policyholder if they can self-attest or provide photos. That said, if
insurers are going to give substantial discounts, they will want to be certain the mitigation
measures have been properly implemented.
Table 3: Select Wildfire Mitigation Discounts by Firm
11
Absolute discounts will depend on risk levels. Also, note that the underlying risk may
still lead to higher premiums in the riskiest locations, but the dollar value of mitigation
discounts will also be greater in those areas. For example, consider two hypothetical
homes, Home A and Home B, both insured with Liberty Mutual, in a Los Angeles community
recognized as a Firewise USA site in good standing and a Fire Risk Reduction Community.
Home A is at a high risk of wildfire and has an initial premium (without mitigation) of $8,302,
with $4,509 attributed to wildfire peril. In contrast, Home B has a low wildfire risk with an
initial premium (without mitigation) of $2,339, and just $30 attributed to wildfire peril. If both
homes are built to the WPH+ standard, they could each qualify for a discount of 21% off
the wildfire portion of their premiums. The homeowner of Home A would save $4,509 * 21%
= $947, while the owner of Home B would save $30 * 21% = $6. The absolute discount for
Home A is much larger, but so is their final premium due to the higher risk associated with
their location.
Considerations for the Future of Insurability in California
Reflection of mitigation investments in insurance pricing not only increases perceptions of
fairness in insurance markets but also is an information signal and financial incentive to
drive much needed investments in risk reduction measures. The recent regulation by the
CA Department of Insurance has been successful in requiring insurers in the state to
incorporate wildfire mitigation measures into their pricing, although the magnitude of these
pricing reductions varies considerably, suggesting lack of agreement across the industry
on the direct relationship between some individual measures and lower claims payments.
As data evolves on the effectiveness of different measures, the offered mitigation
discounts should also adjust.
It is clear from wildfire science that the most risk reduction is achieved when a full suite
of home hardening and defensible space measures are taken together. Insurer
premium discounts also reflect this reality, with the largest savings being awarded to
homes that have undertaken all the measures or have complied with the IBHS standard.
Indeed, the highest discounts are for homes that achieve the IBHS WPH+ standard,
although substantial reductions can also be achieved for homes that adopt all the
measures in the list from the Department of Insurance. While the premium discounts are
unlikely to cover the full costs of wildfire home hardening retrofits, they do help promote
longer-term insurability and, importantly, lower future losses–including uninsured losses,
such as irreplaceable personal items.
The way the discounts are calculated, what measures are rewarded, and how they can be
combined is different for every insurer. This is likely to create consumer confusion and
makes messaging around mitigation and insurance more challenging. Indeed, it is unclear
how much transparency there is for consumers around these discounts. While insurers
were required to notify policyholders, consumers often disregarded mailings. In addition,
most consumers do not often re-shop their insurance with an independent agent. The
variation in discounts offered suggests it could be highly advantageous to a homeowner
who had invested in home hardening, particularly doing many of the measures together or
achieving either of the IBHS certifications, to then contact an independent agent (one not
12
tied to only one insurer) or multiple captive insurance agents (those working for only one
firm) to get multiple quotes and compare which firm would offer them the best price.
The discounts currently offered on the market, however, are provided against a backdrop of
ongoing insurer concern about rate adequacy in the state. The Department of Insurance
has undertaken several other related reforms to address these concerns and encourage
more insurers to return to California. This includes their Sustainable Insurance Strategy,
which allows for the use of wildfire catastrophe models in rate-setting and also allows
insurers to account for reinsurance costs. Both also come with requirements to expand
coverage availability in higher-risk areas. The department has also recently begun a
process to reform the intervenor process. All of these reforms are likely to continue to
attract more insurers and increase competition, which will ultimately benefit consumers.
To get a sense of what mitigation discounts might be most impactful in changing market
availability (as opposed to pricing), we looked to see if any mitigation features are specified
in the current underwriting criteria disclosed in insurers’ rate filings. Notably, we find that
some insurers have indicated a willingness to write more policies in high-risk areas if
properties are certified as meeting the IBHS WPH+ standard. For instance, currently
Farmers only insurers homes in areas of high fire risk (as measured by zone, slope, and
fuels) if they are IBHS WPH+. If you secure a WPH certification (base or plus level), CSAA
Insurance Group has committed that your single-family homeowners policy won't be nonrenewed due to wildfire risk and they will renew your homeowners policy for a minimum of
three years if you maintain the certification and all other requirements of your policy.
Mercury noted in its filing that, subject to any concentration restrictions, they would not
restrict new business for homes that are IBHS WPH or WPH+ certified. This suggests that
insurers might be open to expanding into high-risk areas as long as certain measures can
demonstrably change their loss profiles in reliable ways.
For consumers, three key findings emerge from this snapshot of wildfire mitigation
discounts in the California market. First, home hardening and defensible space matters for
insurability and insurance premiums. Homeowners should seek out information on retrofits
to improve the wildfire resilience of their home, especially if they are going to be
undertaking any other work or construction on their house. Indeed, incorporating wildfire
measures during other construction could be less disruptive and possibly more costeffective and will improve insurance outcomes. Second, the best chance at insurance
availability and improved pricing is by undertaking the full suite of measures in the IBHS
WPH certification. Finally, if homeowners do invest in risk reduction, they should share the
information with their insurer and also shop their policy, as well.
Appendix: Mitigation Discounts for Top Homeowners Insurers in California as of Fall 2025
14
Notes to appendix table: a - for policies with a FireLine score of 1-3; b - for policies with a
FireLine score of 4+; c - for policies with a Zesty Level 1 Group of 1-2; d - for policies with a
Zesty Level 1 Group of 3-5; e - for policies with a Zesty Level 1 Group of 6-10; f - Author’s
calculation based on the equations provided. g - apply if structure separation <=10 feet; h -
apply if structure separation >10 feet and <30 feet; i - apply if structure separation >=30
feet; jk - for homes that do not have IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home designations but have
completed a combination of specified home hardening and defensible space
improvements; l - includes communities that meet IBHS Wildfire Prepared Neighborhood or
similar standards (e.g., communities that effectively remediate connective fuel pathways
around and within the community, communities where the structures meet home
hardening requirements); m - 16% if both Mercury Wildfire Mitigation Community and
Firewise USA Recognition Program, 15.1% if both Mercury Wildfire Mitigation Community and
Fire Risk Reduction Community, 16.1% if Mercury Wildfire Mitigation Community, Firewise
USA Recognition Program, and Fire Risk Reduction Community; n - for Type 1 and Type 2
non-combustible fire-resistive constructions that meet Mercury’s window, vent, and
defensible space requirements; o - apply if in High or Very High Wildfire Hazard Zone.



From Risk to Reward:
Insurance Discounts for
Wildfire Mitigation
Evan Ludington, Yanjun (Penny) Liao, and Margaret Walls
Working Paper 25-30
December 2025
Resources for the Future i
About the Authors
Evan Ludington is a senior at Stanford University studying History and Earth
Systems. He was a summer 2025 research intern at Resources for the Future (RFF)
working under the auspices of the Stanford Woods Institute’s Environment and Policy
Internship program. Currently, he’s working on a senior thesis on disaster management
in California’s 1862 Great Flood. He has previously worked in the California State
Senate and the Institute for Sustainable Energy Policies in Tokyo. 
Yanjun (Penny) Liao is an economist and fellow at RFF. Liao’s research primarily
focuses on issues of natural disaster risk management and climate adaptation. She has
studied the impacts of disasters on local government budgets, housing markets, and
demographic changes. Her ongoing work investigates how disaster insurance interacts
with the housing and mortgage sector, as well as the economic and fiscal impacts of
adaptation policies on local communities. Liao earned her PhD in economics from UC
San Diego and conducted her postdoctoral research at the Wharton Risk Center at
University of Pennsylvania.
Margaret Walls is a senior fellow and director of the Climate Risks and Resilience
Program, as well as cohost of RFF’s podcast, Resources Radio. Walls’s research
focuses on the impacts of extreme weather, floods, hurricanes, and wildfires on people
and communities and the design of programs and policies to equitably enhance
resilience to such events.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate financial support for this research from the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation ii
About RFF
Resources for the Future (RFF) is an independent, nonprofit research institution in
Washington, DC. Its mission is to improve environmental, energy, and natural resource
decisions through impartial economic research and policy engagement. RFF is
committed to being the most widely trusted source of research insights and policy
solutions leading to a healthy environment and a thriving economy.
Working papers are research materials circulated by their authors for purposes of
information and discussion. They have not necessarily undergone formal peer review.
The views expressed here are those of the individual authors and may differ from those
of other RFF experts, its officers, or its directors.
Sharing Our Work
Our work is available for sharing and adaptation under an AttributionNonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license. You
can copy and redistribute our material in any medium or format; you must give
appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made,
and you may not apply additional restrictions. You may do so in any reasonable
manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
You may not use the material for commercial purposes. If you remix, transform, or
build upon the material, you may not distribute the modified material. For more
information, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Resources for the Future iii
Abstract
In 2022, California implemented a major insurance reform requiring insurance
companies to provide premium discounts to policyholders who undertake wildfire
hazard mitigation, such as installation of fire-resistant roofs, vents, and windows and
maintaining defensible space around homes. To evaluate early implementation of this
reform, we draw on insurance rules and rate filings to create a database of mitigation
discounts offered by insurers. We analyze how discount amounts vary across
mitigation measures, insurers, and regions, and assess whether they are large enough
to motivate homeowners to undertake these actions. We also compare the California
policy to similar policies in states subject to hurricane and windstorm risks. Our results
indicate that the current discounts are small: the costs of property retrofits are orders
of magnitude greater than the insurance savings. They are also considerably smaller
than wind insurance discounts in other states, which we attribute largely to greater
uncertainty in the effectiveness of individual wildfire mitigation efforts, coupled with
risk externalities from structure-to-structure fire spread and community-level fuel
hazards that weaken the link between household-level investments and expected
insurer losses. 
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation iv
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. Wildfire Hazard Mitigation 3
3. Insurance Regulations and California Reforms 4
4. Discounts in Practice 6
4.1. The Magnitude and Range of Discounts 8
4.2. Variation in Wildfire Risk and Discounts Across California 13
4.3. Are the Discounts Enough? 17
5. Lessons from Other States 18
5.1. Insurance Discounts in Other States 18
5.2. Why Are California’s Wildfire Mitigation Discounts Relatively Small? 21
6. Conclusion 23
References 24
Appendix A: Supplemental Figures and Tables 26
Appendix B: Methodology for the Analysis of Rate Filings 27
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 1
1. Introduction
In October 2022, California became the first state to mandate that insurance
companies offer discounts on homeowner’s insurance premiums for investments in
wildfire mitigation. The “Safer from Wildfires” regulations require insurers that base
their rates on wildfire hazard to offer discounts for vegetation clearing and removal of
combustible structures, as well as home hardening measures such as the installation of
fire-resistant roofs, vents, and windows.1
 Mitigation discounts also must be offered for
homes located in communities that participate in organized community-level mitigation
programs such as Firewise USA, a voluntary program administered by the National Fire
Protection Association.2
In addition to providing financial incentives for homeowners to invest in hazard
mitigation, the policy is a component of California’s regulatory efforts to foster a more
stable and affordable insurance market. California has had well-documented problems
in its insurance market in recent years, with growing numbers of policy nonrenewals
and rising enrollment in the state’s insurance of last resort, the FAIR Plan. The FAIR
Plan, which provides more bare bones coverage, now insures $650 billion worth of
property in California, most of it in high-wildfire-risk areas.3
Whether the new discounts will be effective depends on their size and their ability to
meaningfully influence mitigation behavior and stabilize the availability of insurance
in high-risk areas. Many factors make the outcomes uncertain, including the
complications arising from insurer regulatory constraints, the burdens of compliance
and verification, and how well homeowners understand the mitigation options and
costs. In this study, we analyze how insurance companies are complying with the new
California regulation and the factors that underpin the discounts they offer. We review
rate filings that insurers have submitted to the California Department of Insurance
(CDI) to compile detailed information on the precise discounts that individual
companies are offering for each type of mitigation action.4
 We merge the discounts
dataset with zip code-level data on company market shares and premiums and a
measure of wildfire hazard . We also compare the regulations and the size and types of
discounts offered with regulations and discounts that apply to wind insurance in other
states. With this information we address the following questions:
1. How large are the typical discounts and how much do they vary across insurers
and by wildfire hazard?
1 See https://www.insurance.ca.gov/01-consumers/200-wrr/Safer-from-Wildfires.cfm.
2 See https://www.nfpa.org/education-and-research/wildfire/firewise-usa for more information and Liao et al. (2024) for an analysis of factors that affect participation in the
program.
3 FAIR Plan data and statistics available at https://www.cfpnet.com/key-statistics-data/.
4 Kousky and You (2025) undertook a similar exercise, though they looked at fewer
insurers and did not calculate average discounts in dollar terms, just percentages. Their
reported percent discounts are in line with ours.
Resources for the Future 2
2. How do the discounts compare with the costs of mitigation investments? In
other words, do they appear to be enough to provide meaningful incentives for
homeowners?
3. How does the program compare with wind insurance discount programs in other
states? Are there lessons for California to learn as its program matures?
4. What can we say, at this early stage, about how the mandated discounts are
likely to affect the supply of insurance in California? Are there potential changes
to the regulations or complementary policies that could improve outcomes for
homeowners and communities, while making the insurance industry in California
more sustainable?
We find that the discounts are relatively small, particularly for that majority of insurers
that base discounts on the wildfire portion of the premium and not the full premium.
Homeowners who live in a Firewise USA community and who undertake all of the
possible actions that qualify for discounts would receive an annual discount of only
about $100 on average. When compared with the costs of retrofits, the discounts do
not appear to be nearly enough, on their own, to motivate homeowners to undertake
these investments. The insurance discounts offered for investments in wind mitigation
measures in some coastal and midwestern states appear to be more generous.
There may be multiple reasons that insurers are offering less generous wildfire
mitigation insurance discounts in California than wind discounts in other states; in our
view, two reasons stand out. The first is related to the difference between wildfire risks
and windstorm risks. Because of how fires spread from structure to structure, wildfire
damage to a given home is, in part, a function of the characteristics of neighboring
homes. This externality presents a coordination problem for insurers in high-wildfirerisk areas, a problem that does not exist to the same extent in hurricane-prone
areas. The second reason for the smaller discounts for wildfire mitigation may be the
relative lack of knowledge about what works to reduce wildfire risk. Wind damage and
home-hardening measures to reduce it have been studied for longer and are better
understood. As wildfire research advances, we expect rate-setting methodologies
to improve, enabling insurance premiums to more accurately reflect the benefits of
wildfire hazard mitigation.
California’s insurance discounts requirements do not operate in a vacuum. The state
has passed several other new laws in recent years, in an effort to stabilize the market.
We describe these policies and place the insurance discount requirements in context.
Two very recent laws may work to reinforce the discounts policy. The first requires
home sellers to disclose to prospective buyers all the wildfire mitigation features
of their home, including both defensible space and home hardening measures. The
second is a new grant program that the state will begin offering to low-income
homeowners in high-wildfire-risk areas for risk mitigation investments. Similar grant
programs are in operation in some other states—most offering grants of $10,000 per
recipient—and have been effective. The state of Alabama has given homeowners $86
million in grants over the last 13 years for investments in new roofs and other upgrades.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 3
2. Wildfire Hazard Mitigation
Wildfire mitigation strategies at the property level fall into two broad categories: (i)
hardening the structure by using fire-resistant materials and (ii) reducing the intensity
of a potential fire around the structure (IBHS 2021). Actions in the first category
include replacing unrated roof materials or an unmaintained Class C roof with a Class
A fire-rated roof; closing vents and eaves; using noncombustible materials for walls,
eaves, and decks; replacing windows with dual-pane, tempered glass; and, to the extent
possible, making the shape of the building less complex, with fewer angles and corners.
The second category comprises fuel management through the creation of defensible
space, which is usually divided into three zones surrounding a home: 0–5 feet, 5–30
feet, and 30–100 feet. Between 0 and 5 feet from the home, only noncombustible
materials should be used. In the distances farther away, recommendations are to use
sparser vegetation and avoid having accessory structures in the area, such as sheds,
wooden fences, and vehicles.
Empirical studies of what mitigation strategies make the most difference in whether
a structure survives a fire are limited but have generally found that structural
characteristics are more important than defensible space (Syphard and Keeley 2019),
that reduced vegetation is more important closer to the home than farther away (Platt
2014; Syphard et al. 2014), and that the spatial pattern of housing development relative
to vegetation is more important than the amount of local-scale vegetation, with areas
with low- to medium-density housing in the wildland-urban interface particularly
at risk (Syphard et al. 2021). In a recent study using damage assessment data from
five historical fires in California, Zamanialaei et al. (2025) confirm that density of
development is one of the most important features determining whether structures are
destroyed. Among structure characteristics, exterior siding was found to be the most
significant.
California’s wildfire-resistant building code, Chapter 7a, which has been in effect
for new construction in high and very high fire hazard severity zones since 2008,
requires Class A or B roofs, fire-resistant eaves and exterior siding, vents covered by
a wire mesh, windows and doors that are rated to resist fire for at least 20 minutes,
noncombustible materials for decks, and defensible space requirements. In an empirical
study of the effectiveness of the requirements, Baylis and Boomhower (forthcoming)
find that homes subject to the code are 13 percentage points less likely to be destroyed
than similar homes built before the code was in effect (a 34 percent reduction from the
sample mean of 39 percent). The new insurance discounts requirements are part of the
effort to address problems with older homes, which are not subject to the Chapter 7a
requirements.
The Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS) is an independent
nonprofit organization supported by the insurance industry that conducts building
science research on natural hazards. The IBHS maintains that using a single strategy
for mitigation is not effective; a systematic approach that addresses both structure
features and the ignition zone around the home is necessary to fully protect a home
(Hedayati, et al. 2023). IBHS operates a Wildfire Prepared Home certification program
Resources for the Future 4
that includes several defensible space requirements and home hardening measures.
The defensible space requirements include a 0–5-foot noncombustible zone around
the house, a 5–30-foot defensible space, tree and shrub spacing requirements,
minimum setback distances from the home for propane tanks, and requirements for
detached structures such as pergolas and sheds. The home hardening measures
are a Class A fire-rated roof, flame- and ember-resistant vents, 6 vertical inches of
noncombustible siding applied at ground level, and noncombustible materials for decks
and other structures 0–5 feet from the house. Homes are certified only if all elements
are met. A “Plus-Level” IBHS designation has additional requirements, such as enclosed
eaves, multipaned tempered glass skylights and windows, noncombustible materials
for gutters and downspouts, noncombustible materials for siding and doors, and no
detached structures within 30 feet of the home.5
 California regulators considered
basing the discounts on combined measures, such as the IBHS requirements, but
decided it was important to encourage homeowners to take individual actions, rather
than having to do several potentially costly things to obtain the discounts, which could
be daunting (Peterson 2025). The regulators were also concerned about potential legal
challenges from requiring multiple actions.
3. Insurance Regulations and California
Reforms
Homeowner’s insurance in the United States is regulated at the state level. While
rules vary, most states have some form of rate regulation that tries to strike a balance
between affordability and industry solvency—that is, to ensure that rates do not
impose an undue burden on consumers while at the same time allowing insurance
companies to make enough profit to stay in business (NAIC 1945). In California (as in
other states), companies are required to submit a rate filing with the state insurance
office (the CDI) for any change in their rate-setting model or underwriting practices
and for any rate increase. No rate changes are allowed until approved by the regulator.6
The CDI typically spends between six months and one year reviewing the filings.
During this time, the CDI raises any objections or questions and may request clarifying
data. Insurers respond and modify any proposals as needed until they are approved.
Several features of California regulations are noteworthy. First, requests for overall
annual rate increases of 7 percent or higher are subject to in-depth public scrutiny;
studies have found that this has resulted in most increases lying just below the 7
percent threshold (Boomhower et al. 2024; Taylor et al. 2025). Second, until recently
the state did not allow the use of catastrophe models to justify overall rate increases,
requiring instead that insurers use only historical losses for rate-setting.7
 Third,
also until recently, the cost of reinsurance, which insurance companies purchase
5 See https://wildfireprepared.org/.
6 In some states, the company does not have to get approval of the increase from the
regulator; it just has to submit the rate filing.
7 Insurers are allowed to use catastrophe modeling output as a rating factor to set relative
rates (i.e., how rates differ from one property to another).
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 5
to manage their underwriting risks and protect against catastrophes, could not be
passed through to homeowner’s insurance premiums. The catastrophe modeling and
reinsurance changes, which took effect in January 2025, are key parts of the state’s
new Sustainable Insurance Strategy, which aims to address problems with insurance
availability, stem the tide of enrollments in the FAIR Plan, and provide some stability to
the California market.8
 In exchange for these changes, which effectively allow insurers
to begin setting higher rates, the CDI mandated that insurers increase their writing of
homeowner’s policies in wildfire-distressed communities by 5 percent every two years
until policies in these areas are equivalent to at least 85 percent of their statewide
share of the market.9
The Safer from Wildfires program, adopted into the state’s regulatory code in
September 2022, is also part of the overall strategy. Safer from Wildfires requires
insurers that use wildfire risk in rate-setting to offer discounts for wildfire mitigation
measures at the property and community level (CDI, 2023). The mitigation measures
for which insurers are required to provide discounts are listed in Table 1. At the
8 See https://www.insurance.ca.gov/01-consumers/180-climate-change/Sustainable-Insurance-Strategy.cfm.
9 This means, for example, that a company with a 10 percent share of the California market
must write 8.5 percent of its policies in high wildfire risk areas.
Table 1. Wildfire Mitigation Measures Eligible for Insurance Discounts
Property level
Defensible space Home hardening
Clearing vegetation under decks Class A fire-rated roof
Clearing vegetation and combustible objects ≤5 feet of
building Enclosed eaves
Noncombustible materials only for any portion of home
improvements ≤5 feet of building Fire-resistant vents
No combustible structures ≤30 feet of building Multipaned windows or functional shutters
Compliance with local ordinances related to fuel mitigation ≥6-inch noncombustible vertical clearance at
bottom of building
Community level
Property located in certified Firewise USA community
Property located in CA Board of Forestry Fire Risk Reduction (FRR) community
Resources for the Future 6
property level, they include both defensible space and building-hardening actions; at
the community level, they refer to the property’s location in either a certified Firewise
USA community or a California Fire Risk Reduction Community.
The regulation does not specify the size of the discounts. It requires insurers to file
a “Rule filing without rate impact” that specifies the discount amounts. Under the
“without rate impact” rule, the CDI treats the rate impact of the discounts as zero
and will not approve increases in base rates unless insurers can demonstrate which
individual policies will receive which discounts. Scott and Alvarado (2023) note
that this “no rate impact” requirement may erode premiums, as most insurers give
discounts without increasing their base rates. In our review of rate filings, we found
that the CDI has only approved base rate offsets in four cases.10 In these cases, insurers
had already collected data on certain mitigation efforts (e.g. roof type) prior to the
regulation and therefore could prove which policyholders qualified for a given discount.
Insurers are also required to disclose the available discounts to policyholders. This
disclosure must include all the discount factors the insurer has adopted, a description
of where a policyholder stands in the range of possible discounts based on their
current policy, and a list of possible actions to make the property safer from wildfires
and how much money the policyholder can save for each action. Disclosures must also
state the policyholder’s fire risk score based on whichever risk metric the insurer uses
and allow the policyholder to appeal the risk score.
Finally, it is worth noting that California has new real estate disclosure requirements
that could be complementary to the mandated insurance discount policy. Sellers of
homes built before 2010 and located in high and very high fire hazard severity zones
must provide documentation that they are in compliance with defensible space
restrictions that apply in these areas, and starting in July 2025, must disclose whether
they have 12 home-hardening features including roofs, vents, and eaves.11 Some
observers feel that because homebuyers are uneasy about the ability to get insurance
in high-risk areas, the new disclosure requirements will lead them to push sellers to
invest in mitigation measures as a condition of sale (Woody 2005).
4. Discounts in Practice
We collected and reviewed all rate and rule filings from January 2022 through June
2025 for the top 25 Property and Casualty insurance groups in California. (See
Appendix B for details on our procedures.) Table 2 lists the companies and their market
shares. Property and casualty insurance is a broad category that includes insurance
to protect physical property from damage as well as insurance to cover liability for
10 The four cases are: State Farm (File No. 24-426), USAA (File No. 23-1002), Homesite (File
No. 23-989), and Hartford (File No. 23-1131). In a filing by Travelers (File No. 23-1039), the
insurer attempted to offset base rates but removed the offsets at the CDI’s request.
11 The 2010 date is because that is when stricter building codes took effect in high and
very high hazard areas. Since 1998, sellers have also had to disclose if their home is
located in a high or very high wildfire hazard severity zone (Ma et al. 2024).
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 7
Table 2. Top 25 Property and Casualty Insurance Groups by 2022 Market Share
Company/Group Property/Casualty
Market Share
Homeowners Multi-Peril
Market Share
State Farm Insurance Group 8.71% 21.22%
Farmers Insurance Group 7.80% 14.90%
Mercury General Group 3.60% 6.08%
Auto Club Enterprises Insurance Group 4.10% 5.10%
California State Automobile Association (CSAA) 3.64% 6.87%
Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 4.46% 6.63%
United Services Automobile Association (USAA) Group 2.70% 5.68%
Allstate Corporation 5.09% 6.07%
Travelers Companies, Inc. 4.19% 4.22%
American Family Insurance Group 1.06% 2.80%
Chubb Limited 3.59% 2.26%
Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company 2.44% 2.51%
Hartford Insurance, Fire and Gas 2.11% 0.90%
Tokio Marine Holdings, Inc. 1.45% 0.78%
Zurich Insurance Group 2.04% 0.50%
Progressive Corporation 2.98% 0.63%
Markel Insurance Company 0.96% 0.07%
Kemper Corporation 2.47% 0.41%
California FAIR Plan Association NA 3.10%
Total 63.39% 90.73%
Note: This table displays the top 18 insurance groups in the admitted market in California by market share; these groups
represent the 25 insurance companies that we examined in the rule and rate filings (along with the FAIR Plan). FAIR = Fair
Access to Insurance Requirements.
Resources for the Future 8
injuries or losses to others. A common product within this category is the homeowner’s
multi-peril policy, also known as the HO-3 policy, which is the standard homeowner’s
insurance policy in the United States.
Most insurers assign discounts on a percentage basis to individual mitigation
efforts and then either add or multiply them when multiple actions are taken. Three
insurers include an additional bonus discount for multiple mitigation actions. Nine
insurers include discounts for complying with the IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home
or Wildfire Prepared Home Plus standard. These standards require that multiple
mitigation measures be implemented together as an integrated package, rather than
as individual, standalone actions.12 Six insurers specify a maximum total discount;
for the remaining insurers, we compute the maximum by following their stacking
formula and incorporating any bonus discounts. A few insurers set their discounts
in more idiosyncratic ways. For example, one sets dollar discount amounts ranging
from $1 to $10, for a maximum of $30. Another gives a 1 percent discount for the first
six mitigation efforts, then 2 percent for the next five, and 3 percent for the last one,
undertaken in any order. Six insurers apply discounts to their overall premium; the rest
apply discounts only to a “wildfire” portion of the premium. We take all these factors
into account in creating our discount database and in calculating average discounts
across insurers.
Notably, Safer from Wildfires requires discounts only from insurers that incorporate
wildfire risk explicitly when calculating their premiums. Three insurers in the state,
presumably in response to the new requirements, moved away from using wildfire risk
in their rating process and thus offer no discounts.
Insurers were required to file their discounts by April 12, 2023. As of November 2025,
the top 20 insurers by market share had discounts in place (or had removed wildfire
risk from their rating procedures).
4.1. The Magnitude and Range of Discounts
Table 3 shows the average discount percentages for each mitigation action and the
range across the 25 insurers that belong to the top 18 groups. We group insurers
that discount their entire premium and those that discount only the wildfire portion
and take the averages for each. Averages are calculated as weighted averages using
statewide insurer market shares.
Table 4 reports the corresponding average dollar discounts, which we estimate by
applying the discount percentages to the corresponding average premium of each
insurer, then calculating a weighted average using statewide market shares of the
companies.13 For insurers that discount based on the full premium, we use each
12 Because the IBHS standards are inclusive of the individual mitigation actions, most
insurers that offer the IBHS discount apply that in lieu of the individual discounts when a
homeowner meets the IBHS requirements.
13 Appendix Table A1 shows discounts offered by the FAIR Plan (which are not included in
the averages in Table 4).
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 9
insurer’s percentage discount and multiply it by that company’s average premium;
we then calculate a weighted average discount across all companies using each
company’s market share as weights. For insurers that discount based on the wildfire
portion of the premium, we include an additional step. We multiply the wildfire share
of the base rate for each company by that company’s statewide average premium
to obtain an estimated wildfire-only premium; we then calculate a weighted average
across all companies using market shares. An important caveat is that our estimates
are based on the share of the base rates that is wildfire related, not the full premium,
which we do not have data on. While this may result in an underestimation of discounts
in high hazard areas, this back-of-the-envelope exercise provides a reasonable
estimate of the dollar discounts.
A few findings from Tables 3 and 4 are notable:
1. Of all the individual items at the property level, roofs matter most. On average,
across the 25 companies, a Class A fire-rated roof provides a far larger discount,
in percentage and dollar terms, than any other single item.
2. For defensible space actions, larger discounts are given for clearance closest to
the home, 0–5 feet, than for farther away.
3. Many insurers apply the same percent discount to different mitigation options,
especially among the home-hardening options. Enclosed eaves, fire-resistant
vents, multipaned windows, and vertical clearance all average a 0.3 percent
discount, with the same low end of 0.1 percent. This is the case because
companies tend to give the same discount for each of these items, even though
the actions might vary in their actual risk-reduction effectiveness.
4. A homeowner who carries out all of the property-level mitigations, both
defensible space and home hardening, will get a maximum discount of 5.65
percent, or approximately $98 for an average policy, if they have an insurer that
discounts based on the full premium (first two columns of each table). If their
insurer discounts based on the wildfire portion of the policy (column 2 in Table 4),
the maximum discount averages only $54.
5. Insurers that use the IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home program to set discounts
provide an average discount of approximately $60 for the standard certification
and $94 for the “Plus-level” certification. Interestingly, the discount for Plus-level,
which includes enclosed eaves, multipaned tempered windows, noncombustible
materials for gutters, siding, and doors, and other requirements beyond the
standard certification, is roughly equivalent to the maximum discount for doing all
individual items when companies base their discount on the whole premium.
6. Being in a Firewise USA community is valuable, providing an average discount of
between $32 and $46, which is more than any single property-level action.
7. When community-level discounts (Firewise and Forestry Fire Risk Reduction
(FRR) communities) are combined with the individual property discounts, the
average statewide maximum discount for insurers that apply the discount to the
overall rate is 13.15 percent, which translates to a statewide average of $215.78.
Insurers that discount only the wildfire portion of their premium provide an
average 16.66 percent discount, which is only $101.52, less than half the maximum
discount for insurers that base discounts on the total premium.
Resources for the Future 10
Table 3. Insurance Discount Percentages, by Mitigation Action: Average and Range
Across Insurers
Full Premium Discounts Wildfire Premium Discounts
Effort Average Range Average Range
Defensible Space
30-ft Noncombustible Structure 0.31% 0.10%–2.50% 0.73% 0.20%– 2.50%
5-ft Clearance 0.84% 0.50%–1.00% 0.72% 0.20%–1.50%
5-ft Noncombustible Material 0.54% 0.50%–1.00% 0.72% 0.20%–1.50%
Local Ordinance Compliance 0.56% 0.10%–5.00% 0.97% 0.20%–5.00%
Under Deck Clearance 0.30% 0.10%–1.00% 0.72% 0.20%–1.50%
Building Hardening
Class A Fire Rated Roof 1.88% 0.50%–5.00% 1.05% 0.20%–5.00%
Enclosed Eaves 0.30% 0.10%–1.00% 0.55% 0.20%–5.00%
Fire-Resistant Vents 0.30% 0.10%–2.00% 0.67% 0.20%–25.00%
Multi-Pane Windows 0.32% 0.10%–5.00% 0.56% 0.20%–5.00%
Vertical Clearance 0.30% 0.10%–1.00% 0.53% 0.20%–1.00%
IBHS
IBHS Wildfire Plus 6.33% 0.00%–26.00% 9.61% 1.00%–15.00%
IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home 3.84% 0.00%–17.50% 6.19% 1.00%–10.00%
Maximum Property
Combined Property Level 5.65% 4.20%–24.50% 7.88% 2.00%–37.00%
Community
FRR Community 0.30% 0.10%–2.00% 0.56% 0.10%–2.00%
Firewise 2.86% 1.00% – 5.00% 6.26% 0.50%–20.00%
Maximum (Property and Community)
Maximum Discount 13.15% 9.40%–31.50% 16.66% 9.80%–60.00%
Note: The averages in the table are weighted by insurer statewide market shares. IBHS = Insurance Institute for Business and
Home Safety; FRR = Forestry Fire Risk Reduction.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 11
Table 4. Average Discounts in US Dollars, by Mitigation Action
Effort Full Premium
Discounts
Wildfire Premium
Discounts
Defensible Space
30-ft Noncombustible Structure $5.83 $5.07
5-ft Clearance $13.98 $4.70
5-ft Noncombustible Material $9.05 $4.70
Local Ordinance Compliance $10.15 $6.90
Under Deck Clearance $5.10 $4.70
Building Hardening
Class A Fire Rated Roof $31.38 $7.61
Enclosed Eaves $5.10 $4.21
Fire-Resistant Vents $5.59 $5.33
Multi-Pane Windows $7.04 $4.98
Vertical Clearance $5.10 $4.02
IBHS
IBHS Wildfire Plus $94.80 $93.65
IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home $56.87 $61.67
Maximum Property
Combined Property Level $98.33 $54.07
Community
FRR Community $5.59 $4.46
Firewise $46.49 $31.52
Maximum (Property and Community)
Maximum Discount $215.78 $101.52
Note: The averages in the table are weighted by insurer statewide market shares. IBHS =
Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety; FRR = Forestry Fire Risk Reduction.
Resources for the Future 12
Percentage discounts under the FAIR Plan (see Appendix A) generally fall within the
range of those in the private market. The overall pattern is similar across action items:
limited variation across individual property-level measures, with larger incentives for
implementing multiple actions and for community-level mitigation.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of policies across the range of maximum dollar
discounts insurers are offering, weighted by the number of policies written in 2022.
The orange bar shows the number of policies that get no discount (because they are
offered by companies that stopped using wildfire risk to set rates). This amounts to
over 500,000 policies, a sizeable number. The blue bars are the policies offered by
companies that base their discounts on total premiums and the red-colored bars are
those that use the wildfire portion of the premium. Consistent with Table 4, the figure
shows that the dollar discounts for companies that discount the total premium instead
of only the wildfire portion provide more generous discounts. The figure also highlights
that most policyholders—holding 90.5 percent of the nearly 4.8 million policies—would
be eligible for a maximum discount of less than $200, and many discounts are well
under $100 (especially those from insurers that discount only the wildfire portion of
the premium).
Figure 1. Distribution of Dollar Discounts
0 200 400 600
Maximum Dollar Discount (Insurer Average)
Number of Policies (Million)
0.5
1.0
1.5
Portion Discounted
No Discount Total Wildfire
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 13
4.2. Variation in Wildfire Risk and Discounts
Across California
Insurers offer percentage discounts that are fixed throughout the state.14 However,
because premiums reflect underlying asset exposure and risks and thus vary by
location, the dollar value of mitigation discounts can vary significantly across the state.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of average premiums charged by insurers across
wildfire risk categories premiums by wildfire risk quintile.15 For each risk level, the
box represents the interquartile range (IQR), spanning the 25th to 75th percentiles of
insurer premiums, and the horizontal line inside each box indicates the median. Vertical
whiskers extend to the highest and lowest values within 1.5 times the IQR, illustrating
the spread of typical premium variation across insurers. Outliers beyond this range
are suppressed for clarity. The solid point in each box denotes the mean premium. In
general, average premiums increase with risk level. In the highest-risk zip codes, the
average premium is $2,145, compared with only $1,120 in the lowest-risk zip codes. The
range in premiums is also greater in the higher-risk areas.
14 The one exception is Allstate, which defined two tiers of discounts depending on insurer-defined territory. For our computations, we use the higher tier of discounts.
15 We measure wildfire risk using the risk score from CDI’s Wildfire Risk Reporting, which
represents insurance policy-weighted wildfire exposure
Figure 2. ZIP-Code-Level Insurance Premiums, by Wildfire Risk Level
1,000
2,000
3,000
Very Low Low Medium High Very High Overall Average
Risk Level
Premium
2,500
3,500
1,500
Resources for the Future 14
Figure 3 shows a map of zip-code-level premiums and wildfire risk. The left-hand panel
shows the weighted average zip-code-level insurance premiums grouped into quintiles,
and the right-hand panel shows the wildfire risk quintiles. The side-by-side maps
highlight that premiums at the zip code level are highly correlated with wildfire risk.
Most of the zip codes with the highest risk (shown in dark red) are in the two highest
quintiles for premiums (medium and dark blue). This correlation partly reflects higher
premiums in areas with elevated wildfire risk but may also stem from the concentration
of higher-value homes in those same high-hazard locations. This pattern is most
evident in coastal areas, where home values are systematically higher (see Figure A1
for zip-code-level median home values). In contrast, many inland high-risk areas do not
exhibit similarly high property values, even though premiums are still elevated.
Figure 4 shows maps of the maximum mitigation discounts by zip code, with the lefthand panel showing discounts in dollars and the right-hand panel in percentages; the
discounts are weighted by insurer market share in the zip code. The dollar discounts
largely mirror variation in premiums, thus the left-hand map in Figure 4 looks similar to
the left-hand map in Figure 3. However, the percentage discount map on the right-hand
panel tells a different story. The zip codes that show the highest percentage discounts
(indicated by blue and dark blue) are those where a greater share of the market is
held by insurers that offer relatively larger percentage discounts (>15 percent). These
are often not the same zip codes as those with higher premiums and higher risks.
This indicates that the strength of the mitigation incentive a homeowner receives
Figure 3. ZIP-Code-Level Insurance Premiums (Left) and Wildfire Risk (Right), by
Quintile
Risk Quintile (Q)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Not applicable
Average Premium Quintile
$347–$1,170
$1,170–$1,450
$1,450–$1,870
$1,870–$2,350
Over $2,350
Not applicable
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 15
may be driven more by which insurers are writing policies in that zip code rather than
local hazard conditions. Specifically, it matters whether the zip code is mainly served
by insurers that discount based on the full premium or only on the wildfire portion.
Other unobserved factors that determine insurers’ general appetites for incentivizing
policyholder risk reduction are also at play.
Figure 4. ZIP-Code-Level Maximum Discounts in Dollars (Left) and Percentages (Right),
by Quintile
Discount Quintile
$2–$86
$86–$115
$115–$148
$148–$198
Over $198
Not applicable
Percentage Discount
8%–11.8%
11.8%–12.8%
12.8%–13.7%
13.7%–15%
Over 15%
Not applicable
Resources for the Future 16
In Figure 5, we further examine whether insurers’ mitigation discounts vary
systematically with their exposure to high-risk areas and their rate-setting approach.
The figure plots each insurer’s maximum percentage discount against the share of
their policies located in zip codes classified as “high” or “very high” wildfire risk. We
distinguish between insurers that apply discounts to the full premium (shown in blue),
those that discount only the wildfire portion of the premium (shown in red), and those
that neither price for wildfire risk nor face discount requirements (shown in orange).
Among insurers that discount the full premium, the relationship between discount size
and high-risk market share is essentially flat, indicating no clear pattern in discount
generosity across insurers with different levels of wildfire exposure. In contrast, among
insurers that discount only the wildfire portion of the premium, discount sizes increase
with the insurer’s share of high-risk policies. These insurers offer larger incentives
where they face greater wildfire exposure, consistent with the idea that firms with more
at stake may be more interested in encouraging risk reduction among policyholders or
in attracting lower-risk customers within high-risk areas. The last category of insurers,
who largely disregard wildfire risk in pricing, tend to write a smaller share of policies in
high-risk areas.
Figure 5. Premium Discounts and Market Share in High-Wildfire-Risk Area
20
40
60
20 30 40 50 60
High Risk Market Share (%)
Maximum Mitigation Discount (%)
Rate Regime
No Discount Total Wildfire
50
30
10
10 15 25 35 45 55
–10
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 17
4.3. Are the Discounts Enough?
The discounts are intended to incentivize homeowners to invest in wildfire hazard
mitigation. An important question is whether they are large enough to do that. Table
5 shows estimates of the costs of mitigation measures according to a study by
Headwaters Economics, a nonprofit economics research organization (Barrett and
Quarles 2025). The first row shows average costs of retrofitting a home with a Class A
fire-rated roof, fire-resistant vents and windows, and defensible space near the home,
as well as the combined cost for taking all actions necessary for adequate wildfire
resistance.16 The estimated costs are for a prototypical 2,000-square foot, two-story
single-family home located on a 15- to 20-degree slope with wildland vegetation to the
rear of the house and adjacent structures within 30 feet (as in a suburban setting).
The costs of the retrofits are one-time up-front costs, so they cannot be directly
compared to the insurance discounts, which are offered annually. A typical roof will
last about 25 years; using the $6,300 up-front cost for a new Class A fire-rated roof
and a 3 percent discount rate yields an annualized cost of $360—more than 10 times
the average discount of $31.38 that insurers are offering for such roofs. If doing all
combined retrofits costs $40,000, the approximate mid-point of the Headwaters
Economics estimates, this annualizes to just under $2,300 (assuming a 25-year life and
3 percent discount rate), also approximately 10 times the average insurance discount
of $215.78. The discounts for vents and windows are similarly low relative to costs,
especially for replacing all vents and windows in a home.
16 The study includes other options; we selected the four items for illustrative purposes
and for comparison with the measures used for insurance discounts.
Table 5. Costs of Mitigation and Average Insurance Discounts
All
combined
Class A Firerated roof
(1,000 square
feet)
Fire-resistant
vents for
enclosed
eaves
Double-paned
tempered
glass windows
0–5 feet
defensible
space (6 cubic
yards gravel)
Headwaters Economics cost
estimate
$23,000–
$60,000 $6,300 $106 per vent $1,200 per
window $2,782
Average insurance discounta $215.78 $31.38 $5.59 $7.04 $13.98
a
 Estimated average maximum discount for insurers that base percentage discounts on full premium; insurers that
base discount on wildfire-only portion of premium offer lower discounts in dollar terms (see Table 4).
Resources for the Future 18
5. Lessons from Other States
Table 5 suggests that insurers are offering only modest discounts to policyholders in
comparison with the cost of retrofits. This led us to investigate what kinds of insurance
discounts are being offered in other states for hazard mitigation actions and how those
compare in size with the discounts being offered in California.
5.1. Insurance Discounts in Other States
Insurance companies operating in several other states, namely those in hurricaneprone regions and some in the Midwest, offer discounts for storm mitigation
investments. Table 6 shows the policies in place in nine states that have mandatory
requirements for discounts. Most of the states, like California, allow the insurance
companies to set the size of the discount, though several have language in their
legislation that the discounts must be actuarially justified. Alabama’s regulations state
that the discounts should range from 20 percent to 60 percent, applied to the wind
or hurricane portion of the insurance premium, and granted for achieving the IBHS
FORTIFIED home standards. According to Awondo et al. (2023), the wind portion of
the premium for coastal homes in Alabama accounts for approximately 80 percent
of the total premium. Four other states use FORTIFIED as the basis for the discounts;
the remaining states either list specific mitigation measures (like California) or simply
state that retrofits should reduce losses. In the states not using FORTIFIED, a home
inspection is often required to certify that the improvements have been made. Six of
the nine states have a grant program, with most providing up to $10,000 per recipient.
Table 6. Insurance Discount Requirements in Selected States
State Insurance Discount Policy Size of Discounts Additional mitigation policies
Wind and hurricane discounts
Alabama Discounts for meeting IBHS
FORTIFIED standards
20%–60% discount
(established in the law)
applied to wind or hurricane
portion of insurance premium;
range based on four levels of
FORTIFIED
State grant program: up to
$10,000 per recipient for new
roof and other upgrades
Florida
Discounts must be offered
when “fixtures or construction
techniques demonstrated to
reduce the amount of loss in a
windstorm have been installed
or implemented.” (Florida
Statute 627.0629(1))
Insurers set discount amounts;
applied to wind/hurricane
portion of premium. Range is
6%–44% for roof covering, rootto-wall anchors, secondary
water resistance for roof, and
shutters (Florida Division of
Emergency Management n.d.)
State matching grant program:
$2 for every $1 homeowner
spends, up to $10,000. Financing
through property tax system
(PACE program); state sales
tax exemption on windows and
doors
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 19
Georgia Discounts for meeting IBHS
FORTIFIED standards
Insurers set discount amounts,
which must be actuarially
justified
Louisiana
Discounts for (i) upgrading to
comply with Louisiana State
Uniform Construction Code;
(ii) installing improvements
that “are proven to reduce
windstorm or hurricane
damage”; and (iii) meeting
IBHS FORTIFIED standards
Insurers set discount amounts.
Range across companies
is 1%–15% on wind portion
of premium (Louisiana
Department of Insurance
2025); the 15% is for meeting
Uniform Construction Code
Income tax deduction up to
$5,000; state sales and use tax
exemptions on storm shutters
Maryland
Discounts for storm loss
mitigation improvements when
licensed contractor inspects
the work
Insurers must offer at least one
actuarially justified premium
discount; insurers set discount
amount
Minnesota
Discounts for meeting IBHS
FORTIFIED standards; required
only for policies that include
wind coverage
Insurers set discount amounts,
which can be based on the
wind portion of the premium
or total premium and must be
actuarially justified
State grant program: up to
$10,000 per recipient (law
passed in 2023; program to
launch with first grants in 2026)
Mississippi
Discounts in coastal counties
for meeting IBHS FORTIFIED
standards
Insurers set discount amounts;
most are 15%–30% (Chaney
2024)
State grant program: up to
$10,000 per recipient
North
Carolina
State law requires the NC
Rate Bureau to file insurance
premium credits that insurers
must offer in 18 coastal
counties for buildings
that resist hurricanes and
windstorms
Approximately 4%–5% discount
on wind/hail portion of
premium for individual items,
up to 9%–10% total discount
(Coastwatch 2018; North
Carolina Sea Grant 2018 );
4%–6% discount for IBHS
FORTIFIED standards
NC Insurance Underwriting
Association grant program for
residents of beach communities:
up to $10,000 per recipient for
FORTIFIED roofs
Oklahoma
Discounts must be offered
when insurer determines
that the premium discount is
actuarially justified and there
is credible evidence of cost
savings; discounts also offered
for IBHS FORTIFIED homes
Insurers set discount amounts,
based on wind/hail portion of
premium. Across 11 companies,
discounts for FORTIFIED
homes range from 3% to
42% (Oklahoma Insurance
Department 2025)
State grant program: up to
$10,000 per recipient for
FORTIFIED roofs
South
Carolina
Discounts for homes in coastal
areas for IBHS FORTIFIED
homes, SC Safe Home
Program, International Building
or International Residential
Code; discounts also possible
for individual fixtures and
construction techniques
Insurers set discount amounts
but must demonstrate a
correlation between the
reduction in premium and the
reduction in risk associated
with the mitigation measures
Matching (capped at $6,000)
and non-matching (capped
at $7,500) grant program for
coastal homeowners. Income
tax credits of 25% of mitigation
costs up to $1,000; tax credit
up to $1500 against sales
tax on materials. Tax-exempt
Catastrophe Savings Accounts.
Resources for the Future 20
Alabama is often held up as a leader in homeowner investments in storm mitigation.
The state’s insurance discount requirements have been in place longer than most other
states, starting in 2009. Alabama is also the only state where the percentage discount
amounts are included in the regulations, and at 20 to 60 percent, they are sizeable in
comparison with insurer offerings in other states. Awondo et al. (2023) estimate that an
average homeowner in Alabama would see a premium reduction of between $366 and
$915 per year. These amounts appear to be large enough, in many cases, to justify the
costs of retrofitting to achieve FORTIFIED levels, which have been estimated at 1 to 3
percent of the value of a home (Ghosh et al. 2023; Gould 2020).17 A recent study found
that FORTIFIED homes in Alabama had 55 percent to 74 percent lower claim frequency,
14 percent to 40 percent lower claim severity, and 51 percent to 72 percent lower loss
ratios after a 2020 hurricane than similar non-FORTIFIED homes (ALDOI and CRIR
2025).
In addition to the insurance discounts, Alabama has had a grant program in place since
passage of the Strengthen Alabama Homes Act in 2011. The program has awarded
approximately $86 million in grants to homeowners since its inception and funded
roughly 8,700 retrofits (Angueira 2025). According to Ghosh et al. (2023), Alabama
accounts for 82 percent of the estimated 37,000 FORTIFIED homes in the United
States.18 Many other states have established similar grant programs, and the California
Safe Homes Act, which passed in October 2025, will set up a wildfire mitigation
grant program for low-income policyholders living in high and very high fire hazard
severity zones. Grant funds are to be used for replacing roofs and creating a 5-foot
noncombustible zone around structures, as well as for communitywide mitigation
investments that will provide benefits to insurance policyholders.
In other states with discount policies, insurers set the discount percentages. We did not
examine rate and rule filings in these states as we did for California. However, we were
able to find some information in various reports and studies, often published by state
insurance offices, on the typical range of incentives offered. Information for Florida,
17 As an example, a home worth $400,000 would cost approximately $8,000 to retrofit to
achieve FORTIFIED levels; when annualized (using a 3% discount rate over 25 years), this
cost is $459, which seems to be roughly in line with the evidence on insurance discounts
from Awondo et al. (2023).
18 The next-largest number is in North Carolina, which accounts for 14 percent of the US
total.
Wildfire discounts
Colorado
Starting in July 2026, insurers
that use wildfire risk for ratesetting must provide discounts
for IBHS Wildfire Prepared
Home certification and for
community mitigation actions
Insurers set discount amounts,
which must be actuarially
justified; must post discounts
on their websites
Income tax credit; Wildfire
Resilient Homes Grant Program
(very small, only $100,000
available for entire state in first
year)
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 21
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, and Oklahoma generally shows a wide range in
the discount percentages across companies and across states. The upper end of the
ranges, however, tend to be higher than what we have found for wildfire mitigation
discounts in California.
5.2. Why Are California’s Wildfire Mitigation
Discounts Relatively Small?
There are several potential reasons that wildfire mitigation discounts in California are
currently smaller than discounts for wind mitigation measures. We offer six possible
explanations.
1. Early Stage. Wildfire mitigation discounts are still in their infancy. Insurers and
regulators are experimenting with how such discounts should be structured,
which is reflected in the lack of specificity in California’s regulatory requirements
and in the relatively conservative initial discount levels. In contrast, wind
mitigation incentives have evolved over many years in hurricane-prone states.
Correspondingly, several states require that wind mitigation discounts be
actuarially justified, and Alabama goes further by specifying allowable ranges.
2. Data Gaps. Insurers may lack reliable information on which properties have
particular wildfire mitigation features, as such information is not likely to have
been systematically collected in the past. Some measures, such as maintaining
defensible space, also require regular monitoring, which increases uncertainty.
In contrast, FORTIFIED roofs are durable, one-time upgrades that are easy to
observe and document through IBHS certification procedures, permitting, and
inspection records.
3. Knowledge Gaps. While research on home hardening and defensible space
is advancing, there remains uncertainty about the total expected losses each
specific measure reduces in a wildfire event across different environments. This
is evidenced by the different approaches insurers have taken to combining
discounts across actions, and the lack of differentiation of discounts for individual
measures. By comparison, the performance of FORTIFIED roofing systems under
wind loads has been more extensively studied and is better understood.
4. Spillovers and Collective Action Problems. Wildfire loss reductions often
depend on neighboring properties and broader landscape conditions. Benefits
from mitigation may be shared across properties, but insurers only underwrite the
individual home. This externality may make it harder to calibrate discounts. This
concern is lower for wind-related risks, which are more property-specific.
5. Uncertainty About How Discounts Influence Behavior. Mitigation measures
for wildfire risk have historically been adopted at relatively low rates. Insurers
may therefore be uncertain about the extent to which premium discounts alone
can motivate homeowners, given the substantial upfront costs and ongoing
maintenance associated with many wildfire mitigation actions. In practice,
discounts could end up functioning more as a transfer to those who have already
mitigated rather than as a strong incentive for new investment. By contrast,
Resources for the Future 22
wind mitigation efforts have often been supported by state grant programs
and standardized retrofit protocols, which can help address these barriers and
support wider adoption.
6. Regulatory Constraints. Regulatory environments differ across states and across
perils. In some states, insurers can charge higher rates once they have filed a
rate request rather than having to wait for regulator approval. In California, on
the other hand, evidence suggests that base rates may already be limited below
actuarially indicated levels. When rates are constrained, there is inherently less
room to offer larger discounts.
We offer this list as likely explanations but more investigation into insurer decisions
about discount amounts is called for. Addressing the challenges that currently limit
the size and consistency of wildfire mitigation discounts will likely require coordinated
efforts across regulators, insurers, and communities. The following interventions might
help address some of the barriers discussed above and encourage discounts that are
more economically meaningful:
1. Clearer standards from regulators, such as ones specifying how mitigation
actions should be evaluated, how discounts should relate to expected loss
reductions, and how insurers should document their actuarial basis, could
improve consistency of the discounts across insurers.
2. Better information on mitigation actions is essential for implementing the
discounts. State or local governments could centralize information such as
inspection results and permitting records into standardized, accessible formats
for all insurers. One example that could be used as a model is the CAL FIRE
defensible space inspections database, which provides property-level data
collected from CAL FIRE inspections.19
3. Experimental, empirical, and engineering studies would help generate more
precise estimates of the effectiveness of individual mitigation measures under
different conditions. These can be promoted through targeted funding and by
facilitating the public sharing of findings.
4. Closer coordination between insurers and communities could help overcome
the collective action problem. Community-level fuel treatments and code
enforcement can make it easier for insurers to justify more substantial discounts.
State leadership to facilitate this kind of collaboration would be worthwhile.
5. With a better understanding of how homeowners respond to financial incentives,
including evaluations of California’s new grant program, policymakers could
design incentives that more effectively motivate new mitigation investments
rather than rewarding actions already taken.
6. As discussed in Section 3, California’s recent reforms expand the use of
forward-looking catastrophe models so that risk can be more accurately priced.
Regulatory changes along these lines could provide a stronger foundation for
offering larger, actuarially sound discounts.
19 See https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/5150c87770ac4970bbdb2fbe7a75bd66/page/Dashboard/.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 23
6. Conclusion
Our review of insurance rate filings indicates that the sizes of the discounts for wildfire
mitigation currently offered by insurance companies in California are unlikely to be
large enough, on their own, to motivate homeowners to undertake most of these
costly investments. Although there is some variation in the discounts across insurers,
none of them appear to be offering discounts large enough to cover the cost of roof
replacements and other home hardening measures. The largest difference across
insurers depends on whether the discount is based on the wildfire portion of the
premium or the whole premium. For insurers that base the discount only on the wildfire
portion, which is 18 of the 22 insurers offering discounts, the average dollar discount is
small, maxing out at roughly $100 for homeowners who take advantage of all possible
actions.
We offered six reasons that the discounts are relatively small. The most important of
these are related to the nature of wildfire risk and the characteristics of the insurance
marketplace. Most fires spread as a result of structure-to-structure ignitions from
flying embers. A homeowner may invest in mitigation measures, but unless their
neighbor does likewise, they may not fully benefit from those investments. With
different insurance companies operating in a neighborhood, each company may be
offering discounts that reflect the benefit of a single home undertaking mitigation
assuming surrounding homes do not. Ideally, all homes in a neighborhood would, for
example, have Class A fire-rated roofs, but the coordination to make this happen is
challenging. In addition, community investments in hazard mitigation through creation
of fuel breaks, vegetation management, fuels treatment, and more are also critical
for lowering risks, and for solving the coordination problem, but state government
programs to encourage local governments to act are needed; insurance companies are
unlikely to address this problem on their own.
It is too early yet to say whether the policy will incentivize homeowners to invest in
mitigation and/or improve the functioning of California’s insurance market by reducing
the number of nonrenewals and stemming the tide of enrollment in the FAIR Plan.
Outcomes in other states and some scholarly research lead us to conclude that the
new grant program and disclosure requirements may be highly complementary to
the insurance discounts policy, improving overall insurance market outcomes and
lowering wildfire risk. Additional research that evaluates the policy as it matures will be
important.
Resources for the Future 24
References
ALDOI and CRIR (Alabama Department of Insurance and Center for Risk and Insurance
Research – University of Alabama). 2025. Performance of IBHS FORTIFIED HomeTM
Construction in Hurricane Sally. May 5. https://aldoi.gov/PDF/News/PerformanceIBHSFortifiedHomeConstructionHurricaneSally.pdf.
Angueira, Gabriela Aoun. 2025. Alabama Study Shows Fortified Homes Paying Off for Insurers, Homeowners. Insurance Journal. May 28. https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/
southeast/2025/05/28/825141.htm?.
Awondo, Sebastain, Harris Hollans, Lawrence Powell, and Chip Wade. 2023. Estimating the
Effects of Wind Loss Mitigation on Home Value. Southern Economic Journal 90: 71–89.
Barrett, Kimiko, and Stephen L. Quarles. “Retrofitting Homes: Cost of Mitigation Strategies for
Improved Wildfire Resistance.” Fire and Materials 49, no. 5 (2025): 762-775.
Baylis, Patrick, and Judson Boomhower. Forthcoming. Mandated vs. Voluntary Adaptation
to Natural Disasters: The Case of U.S. Wildfires. Journal of Political Economy. Preprint
available at https://www.patrickbaylis.com/pdf/buildingcodes-preprint.pdf.
Boomhower, Judson, Meredith Fowlie, Jacob Gellman, and Andrew Plantinga. 2024. How Are
Insurance Markets Adapting to Climate Change? Risk Classification and Pricing in the
Market for Homeowners Insurance. NBER Working Paper No. w32625. July. https://www.
nber.org/papers/w32625.
CDI (California Department of Insurance). 2023. Prior Approval Rate Application Requirements to Comply with Title 10 of the California Code of Regulations, Section
2644.9(d). Bulletin 2023-2. https://www.insurance.ca.gov/0250-insurers/0300-insurers/0200-bulletins/bulletin-notices-commiss-opinion/upload/Bulletin-2023-2.pdf.
Chaney, Mike. 2024. Mitigation Program Funded by Legislature. Mississippi Department
of Insurance Press Release. May 21. https://www.mid.ms.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/Pressrel052124.pdf.
Coastwatch. 2018. Wind Damage? Check Insurance Incentives When Making Repairs. North
Carolina Sea Grant. https://ncseagrant.ncsu.edu/coastwatch/wind-damage-check-insurance-incentives-when-making-repairs/.
Florida Division of Emergency Management. n.d. Florida’s Foundation, Make Mitigation
Happen. https://www.floridadisaster.org/globalassets/importedpdfs/wind-mitigation-booklet-.pdf.
Ghosh, Somik, Ben Bigelow, Alexander Smith, and Olayinka Omole. 2023. A Cost-Benefit Analysis of FORTIFIEDTM Home Designation in Oklahoma. Cityscape 25(1): 303–314.
Gould, Leslie. 2020. The Effect of FORTIFIED Home Designation on Property Value. Theses
and Dissertations. 4348. https://scholarsjunction.msstate.edu/td/4348.
Hedayati, Faraz, Stephen Quarles, and Steven Hawks. 2023. Wildland Fire Embers and Flames:
Home Mitigations That Matter. Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS)
Research. April. https://ibhs1.wpenginepowered.com/wp-content/uploads/Home-Mitigations-that-Matter-FINAL.pdf.
Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS). 2021. Suburban Wildfire Adaptation
Roadmaps: A Path to Coexisting with Wildfires. https://ibhs.org/wp-content/uploads/
member_docs/ibhs-suburban-wildfire-adaptation-roadmaps.pdf.
Kousky, Carolyn, and Xuesong You. 2025. Do California Insurers Reward Wildfire Resilience?
Insurance for Good Blog. Nov. 4. https://www.insuranceforgood.org/blog/do-ca-insurers-reward-wildfire-resilience.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 25
Liao, Yanjun (Penny), Simon Sølvsten, and Zachary Whitlock. 2024. From Catastrophe to
Caution: The Effect of Wildfires on Community Hazard Mitigation Investments. RFF
Working Paper 24-25 (December). https://www.rff.org/publications/working-papers/
from-catastrophe-to-caution-the-effect-of-wildfires-on-community-hazard-mitigation-investments/.
Louisiana Department of Insurance. 2025. Wind Mitigation Discounts. September. https://
ldi.la.gov/consumers/insurance-type/homeowners/hurricane-resource-center/
storm-mitigation-incentives.
Ma, Lala, Margaret Walls, Matthew Wibbenmeyer, and Connor Lennon. “Risk disclosure and
home prices: Evidence from California wildfire hazard zones.” Land Economics 100, no. 1
(2024): 6-21.
NAIC (National Association of Insurance Commissioners). 1945 Annual Conference Proceedings.
Peterson, Mike. 2025. Deputy Commissioner, Climate and Sustainability Branch, California
Department of Insurance. Personal communication with the authors. July 7.
North Carolina Sea Grant. 2018. Memo to Coastal Homeowners: Insurance premium incentives
for wind-resistant construction. September 21. https://ncseagrant.ncsu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Wind-Incentives-Memo_March-9-2021.pdf.
Oklahoma Insurance Department. 2025. Build Fortified: Oklahoma Insurance Discounts.
https://www.oid.ok.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/08/SOH-Handout-updated-1-1.pdf.
Platt, R.V. 2014. Wildfire Hazard in the Home Ignition Zone: An Object-oriented Analysis Integrating LiDAR and VHR satellite imagery. Applied Geography 51: 108–117.
Scott, S., & Alvarado, N. (2023, April 10). Understanding the new California wildfire rating
requirements: Best practices for complying with Regulation 2644.9 and the impact on
insurers. Milliman. https://www.milliman.com/en/insight/understanding-new-california-wildfire-ratings-requirements.
Syphard, Alexandra, and Jon E. Keeley. 2019. Factors Associated with Structure Loss in the
2013–2018 California Wildfires. Fire 2(49). September.
Syphard, Alexandra, Heather Rustigian-Romsos, and Jon E. Keeley. 2021. Multiple-Scale
Relationships between Vegetation, the Wildland–Urban Interface, and Structure Loss to
Wildfire in California. Fire 4(12). March.
Taylor, Reid, Madeline Turland, and Joakim Weill. 2025. Last Resort Insurance: Wildfires and
the Regulation of a Crashing Market. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper No.
2510 (March).
Woody, Todd. 2025. Older Homes for Sale in California Now Come With Wildfire Warnings.
Bloomberg. September 8. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-09-08/california-real-estate-home-sellers-now-need-to-disclose-fire-risks.
Zamanialaei, Maryam, Daniel San Martin, Maria Theodori, Dwi Marhaendro Jati Purnomo, Ali
Tohidi, Chris Lautenberger, Yiren Qin, Arnaud Trouve, and Michael Gollner. 2025. Fire
Risk to Structures in California’s Wildland-Urban Interface. Nature Communications
16(8041). August.
Resources for the Future 26
Appendix A: Supplemental Figures and
Tables
Table A1. FAIR Plan Percentage Discounts by Mitigation Action
Effort Discount
Defensible Space
30-ft Noncombustible Structure 0.60%
5-ft Clearance 0.60%
5-ft Noncombustible Material 1.20%
Local Ordinance Compliance 0.60%
Under Deck Clearance 1.20%
Building Hardening
Class A Fire Rated Roof 1.20%
Enclosed Eaves 1.20%
Fire-Resistant Vents 1.20%
Multi-Pane Windows 1.20%
Vertical Clearance 1.20%
IBHS
IBHS Wildfire Plus 0.00%
IBHS Wildfire Prepared Home 0.00%
Maximum Property
Combined Property Level 10.20%
Community
FRR Community 4.00%
Firewise 4.00%
Maximum (Property and Community)
Maximum Discount 15.00%
Maximum Discount Stated NA
Note: IBHS = Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety; FRR = Forestry Fire Risk
Reduction; FAIR = Fair Access to Insurance Requirements.
From Risk to Reward: Insurance Discounts for Wildfire Mitigation 27
Appendix B: Methodology for the
Analysis of Rate Filings
We collected a total of 96 rate and rule filings, primarily from January 2022 through
August 2025, except in cases where the most recent rate/rule filing was before 2022.
These documents are publicly accessible through the California Department of
Insurance’s Web Access to Rate and Form Filings (WARFF) and System for Electronic
Rate and Form Filing (SERFF) systems, which contain the same files. From each filing,
we extracted base rates, discount percentages, and dates filed, effective, and accepted
by the CDI.
Figure A1. ZIP-Code-Level Median Home Value
Note: Median value of owner-occupied housing units from ACS 5-year (2016–2020) estimates.
Resources for the Future 28
All insurers provided itemized discounts in percentage terms. We used these numbers
to also calculate the maximum discount percentage when it was not provided. In
doing so, we followed the formula or approach as stated in the rate filings to combine
individual discounts either multiplicatively or additively and took into account any
“bonus” discounts (i.e., for completing multiple mitigation efforts).
When calculating an average premium, as in Table 3 and Figure 1, we used an average
premium equal to statewide earned exposure divided by statewide earned premium,
based on 2023 data from the CDI. When calculating average premiums by zip code,
as in Figures 2, 3, and 4, we used earned premium and earned exposure per zip code.
These become similar to a weighted average by market share, as insurers with higher
earned premiums and more earned exposure in a zip code impact its average premium
more. We generally rely on earned premium and earned exposure instead of number of
policies, except in Figure 1, where we use number of policies to demonstrate how many
policies may receive what approximate discount. In Figure 2 and Figure 5, zip codes are
separated into quintiles by a risk index used by the CDI in 2023.
For Table 4 and Figure 1, we further estimate the magnitude of the discounts in dollar
terms, differentiating between insurers who apply the discount to the whole premium
versus those that use only the wildfire portion of the premium. In the former case, we
simply applied the percentage to the average premium. In the latter case, we calculated
an estimated “wildfire component of the premium” using the individual base rate
numbers for each peril in the rate filing. We applied the percentage of the base rate
composed by the wildfire premium to the average premium. This is a rough estimate,
since wildfire premiums are impacted by many rating factors and do not necessarily
scale proportionally from the base rate to the premium. But we cannot know wildfire
premiums, so it is a necessary estimation. In Figure 1, we kept these discounts assigned
at the insurer level, but in Table 4, we calculated dollar discounts across insurers. In
that case, we weighted the discount percentages by statewide market share based on
2023 CDI data. This created a “statewide average discount” that we then applied to
premiums as discussed above.
Resources for the Future 29